## Java

### Introduction

Java is Object Oriented. However it is not considered as pure object oriented as it provides support for primitive data types (like int, char, etc)

The Java codes are first compiled into byte code (machine independent code). Then the byte code is run on Java Virtual Machine (JVM) regardless of the underlying architecture.

Java does not provide low level programming functionalities like pointers. Also, Java codes are always written in the form of classes and objects.

We always pass references in Java. One more example, since there are no pointers, bad memory access is also not possible.

When compared with Python, Java kind of fits between C++ and Python. The programs written in Java typically run faster than corresponding Python programs and slower than C++. Like C++, Java does static type checking, but Python does not.

First one is Statically typed language where each variable and expression type is already known at compile time. Once a variable is declared to be of a certain data type, it cannot hold values of other data types.
Example: C, C++, Java.
The other is Dynamically typed languages. These languages can receive different data types over time.
Example: Ruby, Python

Java is statically typed and also a strongly typed language because in Java, each type of data (such as integer, character, hexadecimal, packed decimal, and so forth) is predefined as part of the programming language and all constants or variables defined for a given program must be described with one of the data types.

### Categories of data
Primitive Data Type: such as boolean, char, int, short, byte, long, float and double
Non-Primitive Data Type or Object Data type: such as String, Array, etc.

#### Non-Primitive Data Type or Reference Data Types

The Reference Data Types will contain a memory address of variable value because the reference types won’t store the variable value directly in memory. They are strings, objects, arrays, etc.

##### String

Strings are defined as an array of characters. The difference between a character array and a string is the string is terminated with a special character ‘\0’.

```
<String_Type> <string_variable> = “<sequence_of_string>”;
```

```java
// Declare String without using new operator 
String s = "GeeksforGeeks"; 

// Declare String using new operator 
String s1 = new String("GeeksforGeeks"); 
```

##### Class

A class is a user-defined blueprint or prototype from which objects are created.  It represents the set of properties or methods that are common to all objects of one type. In general, class declarations can include these components, in order:

1. **Modifiers** : A class can be public or has default access (Refer [this](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/access-specifiers-for-classes-or-interfaces-in-java/) for details).
2. **Class name:** The name should begin with a initial letter (capitalized by convention).
3. **Superclass(if any):** The name of the class’s parent (superclass), if any, preceded by the keyword extends. A class can only extend (subclass) one parent.
4. **Interfaces(if any):** A comma-separated list of interfaces implemented by the class, if any, preceded by the keyword implements. A class can implement more than one interface.
5. **Body:** The class body surrounded by braces, { }.

##### Object

It is a basic unit of Object-Oriented Programming and represents the real-life entities.  A typical Java program creates many objects, which as you know, interact by invoking methods. An object consists of :

1. **State** : It is represented by attributes of an object. It also reflects the properties of an object.
2. **Behavior** : It is represented by methods of an object. It also reflects the response of an object with other objects.
3. **Identity** : It gives a unique name to an object and enables one object to interact with other objects.

##### Interface 

Like a class, an interface can have methods and variables, but the methods declared in an interface are by default abstract (only method signature, no body).  

- Interfaces specify what a class must do and not how. It is the blueprint of the class.
- An Interface is about capabilities like a Player may be an interface and any class implementing Player must be able to (or must implement) move(). So it specifies a set of methods that the class has to implement.
- If a class implements an interface and does not provide method bodies for all functions specified in the interface, then class must be declared abstract.
- A Java library example is, [Comparator Interface](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/comparator-interface-java/). If a class implements this interface, then it can be used to sort a collection.

##### Array

An array is a group of like-typed variables that are referred to by a common name. Arrays in Java work differently than they do in C/C++. Following are some important point about Java arrays.

- In Java all arrays are dynamically allocated.(discussed below)
- Since arrays are objects in Java, we can find their length using member length. This is different from C/C++ where we find length using sizeof.
- A Java array variable can also be declared like other variables with [] after the data type.
- The variables in the array are ordered and each have an index beginning from 0.
- Java array can be also be used as a static field, a local variable or a method parameter.
- The **size** of an array must be specified by an int value and not long or short.
- The direct superclass of an array type is [Object](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/object-class-in-java/).
- Every array type implements the interfaces [Cloneable](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/marker-interface-java/) and [java.io.Serializable](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/serialization-in-java/).

#### User Defined Data Types

##### Enum

Enumerations serve the purpose of representing a group of named constants in a programming language. Enums are used when we know all possible values at **compile time**, such as choices on a menu. It is not necessary that the set of constants in an enum type stay **fixed** for all time.

In Java (from 1.5), enums are represented using **enum** data type. Java enums are more powerful than [C/C++ enums](http://quiz.geeksforgeeks.org/enumeration-enum-c/). In Java, we can also add variables, methods and constructors to it. The main objective of enum is to define our own data types

- Enum declaration can be done outside a Class or inside a Class but not inside a Method.

  ```java
  enum Color 
  { 
    RED, GREEN, BLUE; 
  } 
  public class Test 
  { 
    public static void main(String[] args) 
    { 
      Color c1 = Color.RED; 
      System.out.println(c1); 
    } 
  }
  
  public class Test 
  { 
      enum Color 
      { 
          RED, GREEN, BLUE; 
      } 
      public static void main(String[] args) 
      { 
          Color c1 = Color.RED; 
          System.out.println(c1); 
      } 
  }
  ```

- **Enum and Inheritance**
  - Every enum constant is always implicitly **public static final**. Since it is **static**, we can access it by using enum Name. Since it is **final**, we can’t create child enums.
  - We can declare **main() method** inside enum. Hence we can invoke enum directly from the Command Prompt.
- These methods are present inside **java.lang.Enum**.
  - **values() method** can be used to return all values present inside enum.
  - Order is important in enums.By using **ordinal() method**, each enum constant index can be found, just like array index.
  - **valueOf() method** returns the enum constant of the specified string value, if exists
  - **toString() method** is overridden in **java.lang.Enum class**,which returns enum constant name.
- enum can implement many interfaces.
- **enum and constructor :**
  - enum can contain constructor and it is executed separately for each enum constant at the time of enum class loading.
  - We can’t create enum objects explicitly and hence we can’t invoke enum constructor directly.
- **enum and methods** :
  
  - enum can contain both **concrete** methods and **abstract** methods. If an enum class has an abstract method, then each instance of the enum class must implement it

```java
// Java program to demonstrate how values can 
// be assigned to enums. 
enum` `TrafficSignal 
{ 
  // This will call enum constructor with one 
  // String argument 
  RED("STOP"), GREEN("GO"), ORANGE("SLOW DOWN"); 
 
  // declaring private variable for getting values 
  private String action; 
 
  // getter method 
  public String getAction() 
  { 
    return this.action; 
  } 
 
  // enum constructor - cannot be public or protected 
  private TrafficSignal(String action) 
  { 
    this.action = action; 
  } 
} 
 
// Driver code 
public class EnumConstructorExample 
{ 
  public static void main(String args[]) 
  { 
    // let's print name of each enum and there action 
    // - Enum values() examples 
    TrafficSignal[] signals = TrafficSignal.values(); 
 
    for (TrafficSignal signal : signals) 
    { 
      // use getter method to get the value 
      System.out.println("name : " + signal.name() + 
            " action: " + signal.getAction() ); 
    } 
  } 
}
```

### appendCodePoint() Method

```java
// Java praogram to illustrate the 
// java.lang.StringBuffer.appendCodePoint(int cp) 
import java.lang.*; 
  
public class Geeks { 
  
    public static void main(String[] args) 
    { 
  
        StringBuffer sbf = new StringBuffer("Geeksforgeeks"); 
        System.out.println("String buffer = " + sbf); 
  
        // Here it appends the CodePoint as 
        // String to the string buffer 
        sbf.appendCodePoint(65); 
        System.out.println("After appending CodePoint is = " + sbf); 
    } 
} 
```

Output:

```
String buffer = Geeksforgeeks
After appending CodePoint is = GeeksforgeeksA
```

### Types of Variables

#### Local Variables

A variable defined within a block or method or constructor is called local variable. The scope of these variables exists only within the block in which the variable is declared. i.e. we can access these variable only within that block.

#### Instance Variables

Instance variables are non-static variables and are declared in a class outside any method, constructor or block. As instance variables are declared in a class, these variables are created when an object of the class is created and destroyed when the object is destroyed.

- Unlike local variables, we may use access specifiers for instance variables. If we do not specify any access specifier then the default access specifier will be used.
- Initilisation of Instance Variable is not Mandatory. Its default value is 0
- Instance Variable can be accessed only by creating objects.

```java
import java.io.*; 
class Marks { 
    // These variables are instance variables. 
    // These variables are in a class 
    // and are not inside any function 
    int engMarks; 
    int mathsMarks; 
    int phyMarks; 
} 
  
class MarksDemo { 
    public static void main(String args[]) 
    { 
        // first object 
        Marks obj1 = new Marks(); 
        obj1.engMarks = 50; 
        obj1.mathsMarks = 80; 
        obj1.phyMarks = 90; 
  
        // second object 
        Marks obj2 = new Marks(); 
        obj2.engMarks = 80; 
        obj2.mathsMarks = 60; 
        obj2.phyMarks = 85; 
  
        // displaying marks for first object 
        System.out.println("Marks for first object:"); 
        System.out.println(obj1.engMarks); 
        System.out.println(obj1.mathsMarks); 
        System.out.println(obj1.phyMarks); 
  
        // displaying marks for second object 
        System.out.println("Marks for second object:"); 
        System.out.println(obj2.engMarks); 
        System.out.println(obj2.mathsMarks); 
        System.out.println(obj2.phyMarks); 
    } 
} 
```

Output:

```
Marks for first object:
50
80
90
Marks for second object:
80
60
85
```

#### Static Variables/Class Variables

These variables are declared similarly as instance variables, the difference is that static variables are declared using the static keyword within a class outside any method constructor or block.

- Unlike instance variables, we can only have one copy of a static variable per class irrespective of how many objects we create.
- Static variables are created at the start of program execution and destroyed automatically when execution ends.
- Initilisation of Static Variable is not Mandatory. Its default value is 0
- If we access the static variable like Instance variable (through an object), the compiler will show the warning message and it won’t halt the program. The compiler will replace the object name to class name automatically.
- If we access the static variable without the class name, Compiler will automatically append the class name.

To access static variables, we need not create an object of that class, we can simply access the variable as

```
class_name.variable_name;
```

```java
import java.io.*; 
class Emp { 
  
    // static variable salary 
    public static double salary; 
    public static String name = "Harsh"; 
} 
  
public class EmpDemo { 
    public static void main(String args[]) 
    { 
  
        // accessing static variable without object 
        Emp.salary = 1000; 
        System.out.println(Emp.name + "'s average salary:"
                           + Emp.salary); 
    } 
} 
```

Output:

```
Harsh's average salary:1000.0
```

```
Note: Instance variable Vs Static variable

- Each object will have its own copy of instance variable whereas We can only have one copy of a static variable per class irrespective of how many objects we create.
- Changes made in an instance variable using one object will not be reflected in other objects as each object has its own copy of instance variable. In case of static, changes will be reflected in other objects as static variables are common to all object of a class.
- We can access instance variables through object references and Static Variables can be accessed **directly using class name.
```

### Scope of Variables

#### Member Variables (Class Level Scope)

These variables must be declared inside class (outside any function). They can be directly accessed anywhere in class.

```java
public class Test
{
    // All variables defined directly inside a class 
    // are member variables
    int a;
    private String b
    void method1() {....}
    int method2() {....}
    char c;
}
```

- We can declare class variables anywhere in class, but outside methods.
- Access specified of member variables doesn’t effect scope of them within a class.
- Member variables can be accessed outside a class with following rules

```
Modifier      Package  Subclass  World
public          Yes      Yes     Yes
protected       Yes      Yes     No
Default (no
modifier)       Yes       No     No
private         No        No     No
```

#### Local Variables (Method Level Scope)

Variables declared inside a method have method level scope and can’t be accessed outside the method.

```java
public class Test
{
    void method1() 
    {
       // Local variable (Method level scope)
       int x;
    }
}
```

When a method has the same local variable as a member, **this** keyword can be used to reference the current class variable.

### Blank Final in Java

A final variable in Java can be assigned a value only once, we can assign a value either in declaration or later.

```java
    final int i = 10;
    i = 30; // Error because i is final.
```

A **blank final** variable in Java is a [final](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/g-fact-48/) variable that is not initialized during declaration.

```java
    // A simple blank final example 
    final int i;
    i = 30;
```

Blank final variables are used to create immutable objects (objects whose members can’t be changed once initialized).

### Singleton Class

```java
class Bound<T extends A> 
{  
    private T objRef; 
       
    public Bound(T obj){ 
        this.objRef = obj; 
    } 
       
    public void doRunTest(){ 
        this.objRef.displayClass(); 
    }
} 
```

### Loops

#### enhanced for

```java
String array[] = {"Ron", "Harry", "Hermoine"};
//enhanced for loop
for (String x:array)
{
     System.out.println(x);
}
```

#### do while

```java
// Java program to illustrate do-while loop 
class dowhileloopDemo 
{ 
    public static void main(String args[]) 
    { 
        int x = 21; 
        do
        { 
            // The line will be printed even 
            // if the condition is false 
            System.out.println("Value of x:" + x); 
            x++; 
        } 
        while (x < 20); 
    } 
} 
```

Output:

```
Value of x: 21
```

#### for each

- It’s commonly used to iterate over an array or a Collections class (eg, ArrayList)
- In the loop body, you can use the loop variable you created rather than using an indexed array element. (drawback of for each - no index value)

```java
public static int maximum(int[] numbers) 
{  
    int maxSoFar = numbers[0]; 

    // for each loop 
    for (int num : numbers)  
    { 
        if (num > maxSoFar) 
        { 
            maxSoFar = num; 
        } 
    } 
return maxSoFar; 
} 
```

```
Note: 
for ( ; ; ) 
is similar to
while(true)
```

```java
public class Example 
{ 
    public static void main(String[] args)  
    { 
        // x and y scope is only  
        // within for loop 
        for(int x = 0, y = 0; x < 3 && y < 3; x++, y++)  
        { 
            System.out.println(y + " " + x); 
        } 
    } 
} 
```

### Decission making

#### Switch

```java
switch (expression)
{
  case value1:
    statement1;
    break;
  case value2:
    statement2;
    break;
  .
  .
  case valueN:
    statementN;
    break;
  default:
    statementDefault;
}

Example 1

// Java program to demonstrate switch case 
// with multiple cases without break statements 
public class Test { 
    public static void main(String[] args) 
    { 
        int day = 2; 
        String dayType; 
        String dayString; 
  
        switch (day) { 
        case 1: 
            dayString = "Monday"; 
            break; 
        case 2: 
            dayString = "Tuesday"; 
            break; 
        case 3: 
            dayString = "Wednesday"; 
            break; 
        case 4: 
            dayString = "Thursday"; 
            break; 
        case 5: 
            dayString = "Friday"; 
            break; 
        case 6: 
            dayString = "Saturday"; 
            break; 
        case 7: 
            dayString = "Sunday"; 
            break; 
        default: 
            dayString = "Invalid day"; 
        } 
  
        switch (day) { 
        // multiple cases without break statements 
  
        case 1: 
        case 2: 
        case 3: 
        case 4: 
        case 5: 
            dayType = "Weekday"; 
            break; 
        case 6: 
        case 7: 
            dayType = "Weekend"; 
            break; 
  
        default: 
            dayType = "Invalid daytype"; 
        } 
  
        System.out.println(dayString + " is a " + dayType); 
    } 
} 
Output:
Tuesday is a Weekday
  
Example 2
  
// Java program to demonstrate 
// nested switch case statement 
public class Test { 
    public static void main(String[] args) 
    { 
        String Branch = "CSE"; 
        int year = 2; 
  
        switch (year) { 
        case 1: 
            System.out.println("elective courses : Advance english, Algebra"); 
            break; 
        case 2: 
            switch (Branch) // nested switch 
            { 
            case "CSE": 
            case "CCE": 
                System.out.println("elective courses : Machine Learning, Big Data"); 
                break; 
  
            case "ECE": 
                System.out.println("elective courses : Antenna Engineering"); 
                break; 
  
            default: 
                System.out.println("Elective courses : Optimization"); 
            } 
        } 
    } 
} 
Output:
elective courses : Machine Learning, Big Data
```

- Expression can be of type byte, short, int char or an enumeration. Beginning with JDK7, *expression* can also be of type String.
- Dulplicate case values are not allowed.
- The default statement is optional.
- The break statement is used inside the switch to terminate a statement sequence.
- The break statement is optional. If omitted, execution will continue on into the next case.

#### Jump

- **Continue:** Sometimes it is useful to force an early iteration of a loop. That is, you might want to continue running the loop but stop processing the remainder of the code in its body for this particular iteration.
- **Break**, we can force immediate termination of a loop, bypassing the conditional expression and any remaining code in the body of the loop.
  Note: Break, when used inside a set of nested loops, will only break out of the innermost loop.
- **Return** statement is used to explicitly return from a method. That is, it causes a program control to transfer back to the caller of the method.

> The Java program compiles and runs fine. Note that *Test1* and *fun()* are not declared before their use. Unlike C++, we don’t need [forward declarations](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forward_declaration) in Java. Identifiers (class and method names) are recognized automatically from source files. Similarly, library methods are directly read from the libraries, and there is no need to create header files with declarations. Java uses naming scheme where package and public class names must follow directory and file names respectively. This naming scheme allows Java compiler to locate library files.

### Widening Primitive Conversion

```java
public class Test 
{ 
    public static void main(String[] args) 
    { 
        System.out.print("Y" + "O"); 
        System.out.print('L' + 'O'); // It is because the widening primitive conversion happens only when a operator like ‘+’ is present which expects at least integer on both side.
      	System.out.print("L"); 
        System.out.print('O'); 
    } 
} 
At first glance, we expect “YOLO” to be printed.
Actual Output:
“YO155LO” 
```

Widening primitive conversion is applied to convert either or both operands as specified by the following rules. The result of adding Java chars, shorts or bytes is an **int**:

- If either operand is of type double, the other is converted to double.
- Otherwise, if either operand is of type float, the other is converted to float.
- Otherwise, if either operand is of type long, the other is converted to long.
- Otherwise, **both operands are converted to type int**

### Comments

```java
//Java program to illustrate frequently used  
// Comment tags 
  
/** 
* <h1>Find average of three numbers!</h1> 
* The FindAvg program implements an application that 
* simply calculates average of three integers and Prints 
* the output on the screen. 
* 
* @author  Pratik Agarwal 
* @version 1.0 
* @since   2017-02-18 
*/
public class FindAvg  
{ 
    /** 
    * This method is used to find average of three integers. 
    * @param numA This is the first parameter to findAvg method 
    * @param numB  This is the second parameter to findAvg method 
    * @param numC  This is the second parameter to findAvg method 
    * @return int This returns average of numA, numB and numC. 
    */
    public int findAvg(int numA, int numB, int numC)  
    { 
        return (numA + numB + numC)/3; 
    } 
  
    /** 
    * This is the main method which makes use of findAvg method. 
    * @param args Unused. 
    * @return Nothing. 
    */
  
    public static void main(String args[])  
    { 
        FindAvg obj = new FindAvg(); 
        int avg = obj.findAvg(10, 20, 30); 
  
        System.out.println("Average of 10, 20 and 30 is :" + avg); 
    } 
} 
```

### null in Java

- null is Case sensitive
- Any reference variable in Java has default value null.
- Unlike common misconception, null is not Object or neither a type. It’s just a special value, which can be assigned to any reference type and you can type cast null to any type
- During auto-boxing and unboxing operations, compiler simply throws Nullpointer exception error if a null value is assigned to primitive boxed data type.

```java
public class Test 
{ 
    public static void main (String[] args) throws java.lang.Exception 
    { 
            //An integer can be null, so this is fine 
            Integer i = null; 
              
            //Unboxing null to integer throws NullpointerException 
            int a = i; 
    } 
} 
```

- The java instanceof operator is used to test whether the object is an instance of the specified type (class or subclass or interface). At run time, the result of the instanceof operator is true if the value of the Expression is not null. This is an important property of instanceof operation which makes it useful for type casting checks.

```java
public class Test 
{ 
    public static void main (String[] args) throws java.lang.Exception 
    { 
        Integer i = null; 
        Integer j = 10; 
              
        //prints false 
        System.out.println(i instanceof Integer); 
          
        //Compiles successfully 
        System.out.println(j instanceof Integer); 
    } 
} 
Output:

false 
true
```

- We cannot call a non-static method on a reference variable with null value, it will throw NullPointerException, but we can call static method with reference variables with null values. Since static methods are bonded using static binding, they won’t throw Null pointer Exception.

```java
public class Test 
{              
    public static void main(String args[]) 
    { 
        Test obj= null; 
        obj.staticMethod(); 
        obj.nonStaticMethod();                              
    } 
      
    private static void staticMethod() 
    { 
        //Can be called by null reference 
        System.out.println("static method, can be called by null reference"); 
          
    } 
          
    private void nonStaticMethod() 
    { 
        //Can not be called by null reference 
        System.out.print(" Non-static method- "); 
        System.out.println("cannot be called by null reference"); 
          
    } 
  
} 
Output:

static method, can be called by null referenceException in thread "main" 
java.lang.NullPointerException
    at Test.main(Test.java:5) 
```

- **== and !=** The comparison and not equal to operators are allowed with null in Java. This can made useful in checking of null with objects in java.

> Note:
>
> Using underscore in a variable like first_name is still valid. But using _ alone as variable name is no more valid in Java 9. It is valid before Java 9
>
> Even if you are using earlier versions of Java, using only underscore as variable name is just plain bad style of programming and must be avoided.

#### Using underscore in Numeric Literals

```java
// Java program to demonstrate that we can use underscore 
// in numeric literals 
class Test 
{ 
     public static void main (String[] args) 
               throws java.lang.Exception 
     { 
         int inum = 1_00_00_000; 
         System.out.println("inum:" + inum); 
  
         long lnum = 1_00_00_000; 
         System.out.println("lnum:" + lnum); 
  
         float fnum = 2.10_001F; 
         System.out.println("fnum:" + fnum); 
  
         double dnum = 2.10_12_001; 
         System.out.println("dnum:" + dnum); 
      } 
} 
Output:

inum: 10000000
lnum: 10000000
fnum: 2.10001
dnum: 2.1012001
```

