### key-value pair

Cannot contain duplicate keys and each key can map to at most  one value Some implementations allow null key and null value like the HashMap and LinkedHashMap, but some do not like the TreeMap

The order of a map depends on specific implementations,

- TreeMap - sorted based on keys
- LinkedHashMap - acording to insert
- HashMap - does not.

Two interfaces: **Map** and **SortedMap**

Three classes: **HashMap**, **TreeMap** and **LinkedHashMap**.

**Methods in Map Interface:**

1. put(Object key, Object value): This method is used to insert an entry in this map.
2. putAll(Map map): This method is used to insert the specified map in this map.
3. remove(Object key): This method is used to delete an entry for the specified key.
4. get(Object key):This method is used to return the value for the specified key.
5. containsKey(Object key): This method is used to search the specified key from this map. return boolean
6. containsValue(Object value): This method is used to search the specified value from this map. return boolean
7. keySet(): This method is used to return the Set view containing all the keys.
8. entrySet(): This method is used to return the Set view containing all the keys and values.
9. size(): It is used to return the size of a map.
10. values(); return list of values
11. Iteration in map

```java
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.HashMap;
import java.util.Map;

public class Test {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Map<Integer, String> mp = new HashMap<>();
        mp.put(1, "Prashuk");
        mp.put(2, "Ajmera");

        System.out.println(mp);
        System.out.println(mp.entrySet());

        for (Map.Entry<Integer, String> m : mp.entrySet()) {
            System.out.println(m.getKey() + " " + m.getValue());
        }

        int[] arr = new int[]{1,2,3,4,1,2,2,2,3};
        Map<Integer, Integer> nm = new HashMap<>();

        for(int i : arr) {
            nm.put(i, nm.getOrDefault(i, 0) + 1);
        }
        System.out.println(nm);

        for(int l : nm.keySet()) {
            System.out.println(l + ", " + nm.get(l));
        }
    }
}
```

**Time complexity**

put - 1

get - 1

containsKey - 1

